Training variables, in the context of strength training, such as frequency, intensity, and total volume all directly affect the increase of muscle hypertrophy. Time under tension and contraction types (eccentric versus concentric) affect hypertrophy as well. A gradual increase in all of these training variables will yield muscular hypertrophy.

Resistance training activates key anabolic pathways. Many crucial ones to hypertrophy include mTORC1 that stimulate satellite cell activity, both of which play central roles in promoting increases in muscle fiber size.

Range of motion
Range of motion (ROM) is also seen as another possible factor to induce hypertrophy. Training through a full ROM, particularly at elongated muscle lengths, has been shown to enhance hypertrophy compared to partial ROM. For example, deep squats and full-ROM deadlifts increase mechanical tension on muscle fibers, particularly in the stretched position, which may stimulate greater muscle growth. Partial ROM training at longer muscle lengths has also been found to promote hypertrophy, potentially due to increased muscle damage

Time under tension
Time under tension (TUT) is the duration of time that the muscle being trained is stressed during a repetition. There are multiple methods to introduce TUT in each repetition of an exercise, either by slowing down the eccentric or concentric phases, or by stopping at certain phases of the exercise. TUT has been proposed to increase muscle hypertrophy because slower repetition tempos increase muscular activity. Research comparing repetition tempos shows mixed results. Burd et al. (2012) reported that slower tempos increased acute mitochondrial and myofibrillar protein synthesis, while other studies found that traditional tempos produced greater hypertrophy in untrained individuals, suggesting that moderate tempos may be most effective.[28] This can increase the muscle protein synthesis for an extended period. A study done by Burd et al. (2012) showed that at relatively light loads (30% of best effort). Slow contractions (6-second concentric and 6-second eccentric) performed to failure compared to faster contractions (1-second concentric and 1-second eccentric), slow contractions had not only higher rates of acute mitochondrial and sarcoplasmic protein synthesis but also had significant rates of delayed simulation of myofibrillar protein synthesis 24 to 30 hours after the exercise was done.[29]

However, other research conflicts with this information. In a study done by Shneuke et al., groups of "untrained" individuals underwent slow-speed training (10-second concentric and 4-second eccentric) and normal-speed training. The slow-speed group had some increases in type IIA and IIX fibers, but the greatest increases occurred in the normal-speed group. This shows that although TUT can have some adaptations in fibers, load and intensity are more important for hypertrophy.[30]

The literature suggests that moderate tempos give the best results for hypertrophy (between 2 and 8 seconds), while extremely slow tempos may restrict hypertrophy by limiting the amount of load that can be lifted, limiting progressive overload. On the other hand, very rapid tempos shorten TUT and reduce the stimulus a muscle receives for hypertrophic adaptation.

Overall, while TUT has shown some positive benefits in terms of muscle growth, long-term hypertrophy seems to depend more on total training volume and progressive overload than on repetition duration only.

There has also been a focus on emphasizing the eccentric portion of the repetition to increase muscle growth.