One of the advanced RT techniques is based on a prolonged duration of the eccentric phase
of the movement. The duration of each repetition can be identified by movement tempo, which is
determined by four digits (e.g., 2/0/1/0) corresponding to the duration (in seconds) of particular phases
of movement (eccentric, transition, concentric, transition) [30]. Changes in the movement tempo during
RT impacts the maximal number of repetitions performed in a set, the maximal time under tension,
and the final exercise volume [25–27]. Several studies have indicated that the use of a faster movement
tempo (e.g., 2/0/2/0) results in a significant increase in the maximal number of performed repetitions
when compared to the slower tempo (e.g., 6/0/2/0) [25–27]. In contrast, a slower tempo of movement,
especially during the eccentric phase (e.g., 6/0/2/0), decreases the number of performed repetitions, but
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4897 7 of 14
extends the time under tension, which may contribute to greater muscle hypertrophy [28]. On the
other hand, a meta-analysis of Schoenfeld et al. [60] indicates that similar hypertrophic responses occur
when the duration of repetitions ranges from 0.5 to 8 s, although it must be noted that they [60] did
not control the duration of particular phases of movement (eccentric vs. concentric), thus making
it difficult to draw definite conclusions. Furthermore, a study by Shibata et al. [29] showed that the
dominant leg thigh cross-sectional area increased in a similar manner following both the slow (4 s) and
the fast (2 s) eccentric phase during the back squat exercise performed to volitional fatigue in a group
of male soccer players. In light of the greater force capacity of eccentric actions, and the fact that the
energy requirements are typically 4-fold smaller than during the concentric contraction of the same
load [61], it would seem logical that lower metabolic stress may occur, which could limit the responses
to this training technique.
However, studies indicate a wide range of manipulation of the duration of the eccentric phase of
movement can be employed if the primary goal of training is to maximize muscle hypertrophy [29,60].
Although, it is not currently clear whether slow tempo provides a superior stimulus for muscle
hypertrophy, from a practical point of view, employing a fast but controlled duration of the eccentric
phase (~2s) may allow for a high time-efficiency of training and prevent the excessive time of
training sessions.
3.3. Accentuated Eccentric Loading Method
Another useful method that can be used during RT, based on eccentric contractions includes
accentuated eccentric loading (AEL). This training strategy is based on the muscles’ ability to generate
greater force during maximal eccentric (~20−60%) versus other types of contraction. The use of weight
releasers allow for overloading the muscles during the eccentric phase of movement due to its specific
construction. The weight can be unloaded in the transition from the eccentric to the concentric phase
of movement. The use of high-loads during the eccentric phase of movement is associated with
significant exercise induced muscle damage and mechanical tension, which have been associated with
a hypertrophic response [55]. Furthermore, some studies have shown that performing eccentric-only
contractions led to higher gains in muscle mass when compared to concentric-only actions [30,62].
Nonetheless, recent literature has indicated that when the volume of training was matched, both AEL
and high-load RT led to similar hypertrophic responses in groups of strength-trained athletes [31,32,63].
Furthermore, RT protocols that did not promote significant muscle damage still induced similar muscle
hypertrophy in comparison with those protocols that promoted initial muscle damage [7]. However,
differences appear in muscle architecture adaptations. Training with the concentric-only phase led
to muscle growth mainly by the addition of sarcomeres in parallel (increased pennation angle with
little change in fascicle length), while training with eccentric-only contractions led by the addition of
sarcomeres in series (increased fascicle length and a small increase in the pennation angle) [64].
Furthermore, due to the greater mechanical tension, it could provide an additional hypertrophic
stimulus [31,33,65]. Although it must be noted that the main disadvantage of this technique is the
necessity of weight releasers or the presence of experienced spotters during training. Moreover AEL,
requires the eccentric load to reload after every repetition, thus is possible that the inter-repetition rest
may excessively extend the time of particular repetitions and the whole training session.
3.4. Low-Load Resistance Training Under Blood Flow Restriction
Another RT method that allows for the avoidance of high mechanical stress associated with
high-load RT and the high training volumes required when exercising with low-loads to volitional
fatigue is to combine RT under blood flow restriction (BFR) [34,66,67]. The BFR method involves the
application of a restrictive device (a tourniquet, an inflatable cuff, or elastic wraps) on the proximal
part of the limb to reduce the arterial blood flow and to occlude the venous return [67]. Such an
intervention results in an accumulation of metabolic products distal to the restriction and when coupled
with RT, drastically increases metabolic stress. However, with regard to low-load RT under BFR, a significant increase in the muscle cross-sectional area was observed even without reaching volitional
fatigue in particular sets [35]. Furthermore, several studies have suggested that increases in muscle
mass following low-load RT under BFR (20−30% 1RM) do not exceed those observed after the use
of high-load RT (80% 1RM) without BFR [36–38]. The effectiveness of using BFR concerns various
populations such as non-athletes [39,40], moderately experienced participants (>1 year) [36], and elite
athletes [41,42]. High-load RT with additional low-load sets under BFR may elicit beneficial muscular
responses in healthy athletes [68].
The most frequently and evidence-based repetition and set scheme involves 30 repetitions in
the first set followed by three sets of 15 repetitions with 30 s rests in between with 20−40% 1RM and
pressure, which contribute to 40−80% of arterial occlusion pressure [69]. However, it must be noted
that BFR induced muscle growth is limited to the limb muscles [43].
3.5. Cluster Sets Technique
Another RT technique that partly allows for the balance of both mechanical tension and metabolic
stress consists of cluster sets. In a traditional scheme of sets, repetitions, a chosen group of exercises
are performed consecutively, with a long inter-set rest interval, are then followed by another set of
repetitions. On the contrary, cluster sets include short, inter-set rest intervals (20−60s) with a lower
number of repetitions [70]. Previous research has mostly investigated the effects of cluster sets on force
production, power output, and movement velocity, while findings related to muscle hypertrophy are
limited [44]. Nevertheless, implementation of inter-set rest intervals allows for a greater RT volume to
be achieved for a particular external load when compared with a traditional scheme of sets [44,45]
in trained and untrained men, possibly providing an additional stimulus for muscle hypertrophy.
However, it should be noted that cluster sets induce less metabolic stress, but greater emphasis is placed
on mechanical stress due to the use of higher training intensities of effort in comparison with traditional
sets [44–46,71]. Thus, the implementation of cluster sets with short inter-set rest intervals could be a
useful strategy to carry out high-volume sessions of high-loads, while keeping a high time-efficiency of
training (training volume/time). Furthermore, cluster sets may serve as an alternative to traditional sets
for promoting muscle hypertrophy over time during parallel periodization models [46], and prevent
monotony in training. Moreover, future studies should investigate the direct effects of cluster sets on
exercise-induced muscle growth.
3.6. Supersets and Pre-exhaustion Technique
Supersets and pre-exhaustion during RT can be defined as a pair of different exercise sets
performed without rest. Supersets most commonly consist of two exercises for the same muscle
group [47], agonist-antagonist muscles [48,72] or alternating upper and lower body muscle groups [49]
consecutively followed by a recovery period; pre-exhaustion involves performing a single-joint before
a multi-joint exercise for the same muscle group (e.g., dumbbell fly before the bench press). In a
study by Wallace et al. [47], supersets (flat bench press followed by the incline bench press) resulted in
a significantly lower volume of training than a traditional exercise order in strength-trained males.
However, with regard to agonist–antagonist supersets, investigation by Robbins et al. [48] (bench pull
paired with the bench press) indicated a significantly higher training volume when compared to a
traditional exercise order. Furthermore, this type of superset as well as upper–lower body supersets
were found to be more time-efficient than traditional exercise order sessions [48,49].
The pre-exhaustion technique is commonly used by bodybuilders seeking to enhance the muscle
growth of target muscles. The rationale for this technique is that performing a single-joint exercise
first fatigues the agonist in isolation, thereby placing greater stress on the agonist and increasing
its activation during multi-joint exercise and potentiating its hypertrophy [73]. Another variation is
the reverse pre-exhaustion (e.g., triceps pushdown before the bench press), and the justification for
this approach is that the fatigued synergist contributes less to the subsequent multi-joint exercise,
thereby placing greater stress on the agonist group [74]. However, a study by Golas et al. [75] partially
Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health 2019, 16, 4897 9 of 14
disagreed with this statement as the results indicated that a pre-exhaustion exercise (incline dumbbell
fly) did not affect the pectoralis major activity during the flat bench press exercise at 95% 1RM. Despite
that, pre-exhaustion of the synergist muscles (triceps brachii and anterior deltoid before the bench
press) led to their higher activation during the multi-joint movement (bench press) as compared to the
baseline [75]. Furthermore, results of a study by Soares et al. [50] suggested that pre-exhaustion (triceps
pushdown followed by the bench press) decreased the maximal number of repetitions performed
during a set to volitional fatigue.
In conclusion, practitioners aiming to maximize training volume and intensity of effort may be
well advised to consider the use of supersets (agonist–antagonist and upper–lower body) in their RT
programs. The use of these exercise orders may be more time-efficient than the traditional approach,
and especially useful when time limitations exist in the planning of training sessions.
3.7. Drop Sets and Sarcoplasma Stimulating Training Technique
Drop sets involve performing a set to volitional fatigue with a given load and then immediately
reducing the load (e.g., ~20%) and continuing the exercise until subsequent volitional fatigue [76].
Briefly, the rationale for this technique is high metabolic stress induced due to a high number of
repetitions performed with short rest intervals. Accordingly, a study by Fink et al. [51] showed
significantly higher muscle thickness after drop sets in comparison with RT following a traditional sets
scheme, which can be considered as a potential marker for metabolic stress [57]. Furthermore, results
of the study by Fink et al. [51] showed significant increases in the triceps cross-sectional area after six
weeks of drop sets training when compared to traditional sets. Nevertheless, it must be noted that
participants taking part in this research were recreational trained persons with little experience in RT
(did not regularly train for more than one year). On the other hand, Angleri et al. [52] demonstrated
that drop sets did not promote greater lower body muscle growth when compared with traditional
sets in well-trained males when training volume was equalized.
Similarly to drop sets, sarcoplasm stimulating training (SST) consists of sets of exercises performed
at 70–80% 1RM to volitional fatigue and then repeating this protocol twice more with 20 s rest intervals
in between. The next step is to reduce the external load by 20% and perform an additional set with
a 4/0/1/0 tempo; following a 20 s rest interval, 20% of the external load is reduced again, and a set
with 4/0/1/0 tempo is completed to volitional fatigue. In the last set, the load is further decreased by
20% and after its completion, following a 20 s rest interval, a static hold is performed (e.g., at 90◦ of
elbow flexion) to volitional fatigue [53]. Another SST variation refers to the performance of eight sets
of exercises at 70−80% 1RM to volitional fatigue with programmed rest intervals between subsequent
sets (45, 30, 15, 5, 5, 15, 30, and 45 s) without reducing the load [53]. Similarly, to drop sets, the main
aim of SST is to induce high metabolic stress [53]. Recently, de Almeida et al. [53] demonstrated that
SST resulted in greater acute biceps brachii and triceps brachii muscle thickness when compared to a
traditional set scheme in trained subjects, even when total training volume was higher in a traditional
set scheme RT.
Evidence suggests the beneficial effects of both drop sets and SST in acute increases in triceps
brachii muscle thickness [53] in both amateur and well-trained subjects, even with lower training
volume versus a traditional set scheme RT. However, studies that have investigated the chronic effects
of drop sets did not show a superior hypertrophy response when compared with traditional sets [52,54].
Moreover, the chronic effects of SST on muscle growth have not been examined yet.