Progressive overload is a method of strength training and hypertrophy training that advocates for the gradual increase of the stress placed upon the musculoskeletal and nervous system.[1] The principle of progressive overload suggests that the continual increase in the total workload during training sessions will stimulate muscle growth and strength gain by muscle hypertrophy.[2] This improvement in overall performance will, in turn, allow an athlete to keep increasing the intensity of their training sessions. The goal of strength-training programs is to increase one’s physical strength and performance. This is achieved through resistance training. By placing the exercise musculature under greater-than-normal demand, the body will start a natural adaptation process, improving its capabilities to endure that higher amount of stress. Neuromuscular adaptation will occur first,[5] which will already increase the individual’s strength when lifting. With consistency in the training sessions, what will follow will be an increase in overall muscle mass and the strengthening of connective tissue.[5]

Progressive overload not only stimulates muscle hypertrophy, but it also stimulates the development of stronger and denser bones, ligaments, tendons and cartilage.[5] Progressive overload also incrementally increases blood flow to regions of the body exercised and stimulates more responsive nerve connections between the brain and the muscles involved. In fact, studies suggest that the increase in muscle contraction force, caused by resistance training, happens partially due to an increase in the responsiveness and efficacy of the nervous system.[6]

According to recent[when?] studies, progressive overload may also be beneficial for the overall health of the individual since it is a good method to increase muscle strength, which was found to decrease the risk of all-cause mortality regardless of muscle mass.[7] Conversely, decreased use of a muscle results in incremental loss of mass and strength, known as muscular atrophy. Sedentary people often lose a pound or more of muscle annually.[citation needed] The loss of 10 pounds of muscle per decade is one consequence of a sedentary lifestyle. The adaptive processes of the human body will only respond if continually called upon to exert greater force to meet higher physiological demands.[8]

In order to minimize injury and maximize results, a novice should begin at a comfortable level of muscular intensity and advance towards overload of the muscles over the course of an exercise program.[8][9] Progressive overload requires a gradual increase in volume, intensity, frequency or time in order to achieve the targeted goal of the user. In this context, volume, intensity, and frequency are defined as follows:[9]

Volume - the total number of repetitions multiplied by the resistance used to perform each repetition.
Intensity - the percent value of maximal functional capacity, or expressed as a percent of the maximum number of repetitions.
Frequency - how often a person engages in training activities.
Interval duration - the time in between sets of same exercise or between different exercises.
This technique results in greater gains in physical strength and muscular growth,[10] but there are limits. An excess of training stimuli can lead to the problem of overtraining.[11] Overtraining is the decline in training performance over the course of a training program, often accompanied by an increased risk of illness or injury or a decreased desire to exercise. To help avoid this problem, the technique of periodization is applied. Periodization can apply different load progression strategies depending on individual fitness goals. Periodization in the context of fitness or strength training programs means scheduling for adequate recovery time between training sessions, and for variety over the course of a long-term program. Motivation can be maintained by avoiding the monotony of repeating identical exercise routines.

